[Music]
I'm going to speak about one of my
favorite subjects which is high blood
pressure and it's one of my favorite
subjects for many reasons I'm a primary
care general internist and it's by far
and away the most common thing that
family physicians and general internists
and other primary care clinicians do in
primary care practice is help patients
with their blood pressure in addition
when we look at worldwide health
depending on which study you read
there's some evidence that high blood
pressure is the number one cause of
preventable deaths worldwide others
would argue tobacco is on that list or
maybe diet is on that list but certainly
high blood pressure is on the very very
top of that list if not first then in
the top three in addition in the United
States we know that the rates of heart
disease and stroke have been declining
particularly heart disease and we when
we determine why that is we know that a
lot of the progress has been from the
way we treat heart attacks and strokes
in the intensive care unit but over half
of it is from the way we work with
prevention of heart attacks and strokes
with the treatment of common risk
factors as we call them and the three
most important again are tobacco a high
blood cholesterol and high blood
pressure and again you could debate
amongst those three which has had the
most impact but again
treatment of high blood pressure control
of high blood pressure is on the
shortlist now having said all that
another thing we know is that if you
look at population studies having a
lower blood pressure is healthier than
having a high blood pressure and in fact
that relationship starts at pretty low
blood pressure levels in other words if
your blood pressure is even over a
hundred and ten 120 your risk
sadistically of having a heart attack or
stroke begins to increase but it's a
very small amount for any given patient
and despite that observational evidence
that epidemiologic evidence we still
have a tremendous amount of controversy
about at what level to actually begin
treating it and if we're gonna treat it
how to treat it and so that's my plan
for tonight is to address some of those
larger questions both big and small
related to on the management of high
blood pressure and I'll do that by first
telling you that I have no conflicts
related to the material or any of the
medications or devices I'm gonna speak
about tonight and this is my road map
this is what I hope to cover for you
tonight I'm going to begin with
something that's very basic which is how
do how do I know if I have high blood
pressure and the corollary to that is
what is the best way to measure it so
we'll spend more time than you expect on
that subject because it turns out it's
really really important how can I lower
my blood pressure without medications
when do I need medications at what
threshold do we begin treatment is it
160 150 140 130 120 what's the right
number and then if you do need treatment
for high blood pressure what medications
are best and there we'll touch on all of
those issues and several others along
the way now the other reason why I chose
this subject for this year is because
there's a tremendous amount of
controversy about this subject in the
medical community and I'll spend some
time discussing that with you but as you
know clinicians now make a lot of
decisions in office practice excuse me
based on clinical guidelines and so many
different groups of experts write
guidelines based on their reading of the
best evidence
published the guidelines and we seek
consensus and in many things that we do
over the years we've developed certain
consensus around sake screening for
colon cancer or mammography between the
ages of 50 and 69 we're not doing Pap
tests under age 21 these are things
where we as a community of experts have
come together and most of the and almost
all the guidelines are consistent and
aligned with each other but as you'll
see in the treatment of high blood
pressure we have guidelines that are
uniquely distinct from each other and
have major impacts so depending on how
you read the evidence and or how which
guideline you choose to follow it really
leads to big differences in whether you
need medications and if so how many and
so I'll try to touch on all of those
things so let's talk with measuring
blood pressure and this is a humbling
topic to talk about because you can get
your blood pressure measure now in the
supermarket in the pharmacy and hair
salons and and buy equipment from Amazon
or your local medical supply store the
mas on medical assistance so the nurses
will check it when you come in to see
the doctor or the dentist and so it's
there's a lot a number and you can of
course check it at home and so there's a
tremendous amount of measurement of
blood pressure being done and the
take-home message here is that we are
very poor at accurately measuring blood
pressure and I recently wrote a paper on
this and if you want to read more of the
references they're asking the question
which is how can we treat blood pressure
correctly if we're not measuring it
correctly and I would argue we don't
measure it correctly in any of the
settings in which we have the
opportunity to measure it so let me
review that a little bit it's also
humbling to talk about this because for
any of you who are health professionals
yourselves or have family members or who
are health professionals this is the the
almost the first thing everyone learns
and yet despite that we do it quite
imperfectly as a profession now this is
confusing because there are three
different ways they'll actually be a
fourth that I'll mention as well to
measure blood pressure and that is and
it has to do with the setting in which
we measure it so the most common is you
go into someone's office a doctor a
nurse practitioner whomever and they
measure your blood pressure so that's
called office measurement and that's
that's actually been our gold standard
so when we look at studies of treatment
of high blood pressure almost all of
them have used office measurement as the
gold standard but of course you can also
measure blood pressure at home and if
you do that if you include home
measurement as part of someone's regimen
it turns out that the patients end up
using less medication but they also have
less good blood pressure control and so
it's a little bit of a trade-off because
you tend to get lower numbers on average
when you measure at home and I'll say
more about that and then the third
option is something we called an
ambulatory monitor and these have been
around for decades but they're very
underutilized and what they are is you
would wear a blood pressure cuff you
could wear it for 24 hours or 18 hours
while you while you're awake it can be
programmed to automatically take your
blood pressure no matter what activity
you're doing and it gives us an average
blood pressure done robotically if you
will over the course of 18 hours or 24
hours and it turns out for from some
recent evidence these ambulatory
monitors this 24-hour average correlates
the best with strokes and heart attacks
and when I use that abbreviation CVD I'm
talking about cardiovascular disease
which includes heart attacks and strokes
now we have these three different
categories of blood pressure
and it turns out they measure different
things and they don't correlate all that
well with each other sometimes in
medicine if we comparing diagnostic
tests with each other we compare them to
a gold standard and we can describe the
characteristics of the test which
patients they might miss which patients
they might over detect the problem here
is that we don't know which is the gold
standard
so compete we can compare them to each
other but we don't really know what is
the objective truth so what we end up
with is three different strategies for
measuring blood pressure that we have to
interpret each one on its own now the
medical community has reached consensus
on how to measure correctly and the last
time I counted from the earth one of the
official guidelines that I'll make
reference to later there were 19
different elements that constituted an
accurate blood pressure measurement now
I've summarized these into eight but it
includes all 19 I've just combined a few
but what I want you to do as I go
through these is think about the last
time you had your blood pressure
measured in the office and which of
these were followed and which of these
were not and that's really the punchline
and we'll also get to the second
punchline which is when you're measuring
your own blood pressure at home you
should do the same things that I'm about
to describe that the clinician should do
in the office and so again think about
how you're measuring your blood pressure
at home and which of these best
practices you're following so one of the
most important things is that you need
to be seated for five minutes before the
blood pressure is taken so in my office
what happens off often the patients are
to have trouble they're late for the
appointment they're having trouble
finding parking there's traffic around
the office they finally get in this the
the the parking spots have painted too
tight finally get it in you almost hit
the post
you rush upstairs the elevator stopping
at every floor you finally come in
there's still time to get checked in by
the nurse and she sits you down and she
starts reviewing your chief complaint
and starts reviewing your medications
and while she does that she's cranking
up the blood pressure so they're about
six things wrong with that particular
scenario and one of the most important
is to allow the body to equilibrate
before the blood pressure is measured
while the measurement is done the back
should be supported and the feet on the
ground now even in my own office where I
see patients private personally I cannot
do this because I have an exam table and
the way the exam table is positioned to
the cuff on the wall I don't it's not an
exam table it goes up and down so my
patients don't have their back supporter
and don't have their feet on the ground
even in my own office so you're not
supposed to take any caffeine exercise
or smoking for thirty minutes I'll say
more about caffeine later the caffeine
is not associated with high blood
pressure chronically but in the
short-term if you drink a cup of coffee
right now it can increase the blood
pressure my personal favorite is no
talking so no talking by the patient and
no talking by the person who's taking
the blood pressure so this is one
certainly that the these initial blood
pressures are often done incorrectly
there should be no clothing under the
cuff another common mistake so often
your blood pressure is being taken in a
public setting the cuff is put on over
your clothes that's incorrect
the but the arm should be supported at
the level of your heart the atrium one
of the chambers of the heart so usually
on a table or on the clinicians arm but
up in this relaxed position and probably
the most important of all or one of the
most important of this list is a correct
cuff size and so most of the blood
pressure cuffs you purchase if you don't
go out of your way to ask for a larger
cuff will be too small
and that's true for because of obesity
and overweight that's true because of
excess skin folds that may be true cause
of excess muscle mass but in our society
in my practice I hang up the large cuff
I take out the other ones I set them
aside and I never use them all day long
because the large cup will fit almost
everyone and if the large cuff is too
small too large that you do not get a
falsely low value the only thing that
all of these different factors do is
give you a value that's too high so
basically what we're doing is over
diagnosing high blood pressure by the
incorrect measurement of blood pressure
and that's true in the office and that's
true at home so again that's the long
list it's a lot of time spent on this
simple subject but I think it's on the
very short list one of the most
important things we can do to improve
the way we manage high blood pressure
and as I implied this is also true at
home so remember all of these things
when you're checking blood pressure at
home these are the best practices that
you should follow at home let me I asked
I last to take questions at the end for
them so we for the editing purposes but
the question was how tight to make the
cuff the cuff board is automatically
it's marked where to to fit it around
the arm uninflated it should be
comfortable and when you inflate it it
gets tight and the tightness is derived
by how many millimeters of mercury you
inflate it to so if your blood pressure
if I think your blood pressure might be
a hundred and eighty then I need to go
higher than a hundred and eighty in
order to come down to get that
measurement correct and if I get up to
200 it's gonna hurt if I think your
blood pressure is 130 I might go up to
160 and that would feel on the
comfortable side of tight so the cuff
itself just comfortably around the so it
stays on the arm by itself basically
and and then the pressure is what
determines that feeling that oh that
hurts a little or that's too tight the
other controversy is what blood pressure
to count what do you write in the chart
or what do you write on your log at home
the most of the guidelines in the United
States talk about doing repeated
measurements and averaging them that's
okay it's a little hard to do the
arithmetic in your head you know you
have to be you know slick with the pen
write it write down the value because
you'll forget it write down the second
value and then average the two that you
one can do that and the office it gets a
little more complicated because the
medical assistant or nurse is taking a
blood pressure or two then do I count
his or hers and and then my own and
average those two or they do it twice
myself and just average my two so
there's a lot of uncertainty about the
best practice but it turns out and I'll
show you this in a different set in a
few slides it turns out that the
acceptable way and this is true the
Canadians do it this way and in fact
most of the quality measures in the
United States do it this way is you can
record the lowest value so if you've
taken it two or three times you don't
have to average but you record the
lowest one and our definition of blood
pressure control is determined using the
lowest value so many people make an
error on that as well
now all of these things can lead to a
dramatic increase in blood pressure and
I'm talking dramatic 30 points
millimeters of mercury you know on
average it's you know people report
about 20 but some people it's it can be
substantially higher so if your blood
pressure is high it needs one of the
first things to do is repeat it and in
fact a study was just done that was
published earlier this year and it was a
study from 20 different clinics in a
city like ours and the medical
assistants were instructed on these 19
features that I just
viewed of taking the blood pressure best
practice and then they were instructed
with one other thing which was they were
told if the blood pressure is elevated
over in this case 140 over 90 take it
again and just by taking it a second
time the blood pressure was under 140
over 90 over a third of the time so
repeating the measurements routinely
give you a lower measurement in part
maybe because that resting is happening
now a little bit that's settling down
that we talked about and so on so that's
a very easy trick is just take it again
and you can record the lower of the
values and as I talked talked about this
is an ongoing controversy and different
practices do this differently but I
think when you look at quality measures
in the United States including the ones
we use from the federal government that
are called HEDIS measures or what the
kaisers do in their population studies
and so forth the quality community
accepts the lowest measurement when two
or three values have been taken but but
the guidelines still often talk about
averaging multiple measurements now
there's also something that's not common
I call it research grade measurement and
this would be the way this was done in
the in this one particular study which
I'll come back to call the Sprint study
the systolic blood pressure intervention
trial they had the medical assistant
take the blood pressure akin to the way
we would in the office and then they
would instruct the patient to go into a
quiet room that was with dim lighting
they would have an automatic machine a
robotic machine to take the blood
pressure 'men they would sit for five
minutes
they had three automated measurements
with some pause in between there was no
human in the room all the different
19:00 features were being adhere to and
the blood pressures were averaged and
what was fascinating a
about this is that when they compared
the values they got in the darkroom with
the automated measurement it was 12 and
a half points lower than what the nurse
got in their advanced high blood
pressure setting and right this is a
place where people were coming to see
experts to participate in a big study
and even in that big study compared to
the robotic darkroom the darkroom was 12
and a half points lower keep that in the
back of your mind because you'll see
this study turns out to be one of the
major studies that has influenced some
of the guidelines that suggest we should
treat people at much lower values and so
it's a little bit of a catch-22 if
you're gonna use the research grade
measurement which is twelve points lower
then treating at a lower threshold may
be okay but if you're gonna measure it
the way we normally measure it they may
be treating it at the higher threshold
is also okay
and you'll see where the guidelines fall
out in that regard but remember this
robotic measurement and this what we may
see in the future is that more people
will move to this it would be pretty
easy to do in a busy office setting you
just set up you need an extra room and
in a robot just an automated machine
basically and it's pretty easy to do but
it's not how it's currently done now
the other issue that has been become
part of common practice led by consumers
and also device makers is to measure the
blood pressure outside the office and
there is a consensus about doing this in
fact the US Preventive Services Task
Force as early as 2015 so several years
ago as part of their official
recommendations for blood pressure
management suggested that measurement
should be obtained outside the clinical
setting meaning outside of the
physician's Oakland the respected nurse
practitioners office before starting
treatment this is not common practice
most clinicians continue to treat based
upon their own measurement but it is
interesting because many of us follow
the US Preventive Services Task Force
guidelines for other things like cancer
screening but in this case it hasn't
really been fully integrated into common
practice people used home management
home measurement for a variety of things
but it's it's not that common to use it
routinely as second test if you will
before you begin treatment however in
England that's what they do and so the
blood pressure has to be checked outside
of the office before the patient gets
treated especially with medications all
right let me move next to home
measurement briefly I've already said
several things about this it turns out
this is not well standardized you all if
you're measuring your blood pressure at
home you're all doing it in your private
time and space and you know I have no
idea how you're doing it I barely know
how my medical assistant is doing it but
I certainly don't know how you you're
doing it although one good trick is to
bring your machine in with you when you
see your clinician and demonstrate to
them how you are taking it which gives
you the opportunity to also make sure
the cup size is correct that your
technique is correct then the machine is
a well standardized machine correlates
with the office measurement and so on so
that's not a bad little trick if you
want to be a little bit more precise in
your home measurement it's also not
fully evidence base and what I mean by
that is when patients are assigned blood
pressure treatment with home measurement
and compared to blood pressure treatment
without home measurement and that's the
only extra intervention there's no
benefit of home measurement now that's a
little misleading because if you then if
you did a real comprehensive program of
blood pressure control that included
pharmacy involvement and home checks and
frequent checks and combination pills
and things like that
and home measurement then as part
of an integrated comprehensive plan home
measurement can be a useful tool but
when it's been isolated as the only
extra thing that's done it doesn't help
that much it's a little bit like
checking blood sugars in people who are
on pills for the diabetes where now I'm
not talking if you're taking insulin
then you must check your home blood
sugar but if you're just taking pills
for depending on the pills many patients
do not need to check their home blood
sugar and it's not associated with a
very significant change in diabetes
control and this is analogous to that
correct home monitoring requires all 19
of those other elements so everything
that I suggested in the office you
should do at home and therefore again
bringing your equipment in and having
the the nurse or physician watch you
take your blood pressure is a good way
to make sure that your own skills up to
best practices and again things like
correct equipment and is also extremely
important and and that's complicated now
because there's so much new equipment
many many of the new devices have not
been well validated and so people are
selling all sorts of things on
fingertips and wrists and and so forth
and many of those measurements have not
been validated in rigorous studies and
when they have been studied in rigorous
studies do not correlate particularly
well with the measures that I'm
discussing the correct timing is
interesting because as I mentioned with
the ambulatory monitor it's around the
clock and so you could argue that doing
home measurement that mimics the
ambulatory monitor might make sense and
that's not a bad way to do it so rather
than checking it every day or every day
twice a day or whatever you could argue
maybe I'll check it five times a day one
day per month akin to my using an
ambulatory monitor so getting getting a
measurement throughout the day because
the blood pressure goes up and down in a
diurnal rhythm over the course of a
24-hour period its highest in the
morning
and its slowest in the evening so if
you're checking your blood pressure
after dinner especially after a glass of
wine kids are asleep everything's
copasetic that's you're gonna get a
lower blood pressure then than if you
check it when you first wake up in the
morning before you've taken your
medications so that's important to know
and so what our current guidelines are
you can do this all day one day every
now and again model but the standard
recommendations are to check it in the
morning before you take your medications
and then before dinner
as a way to frame the higher and lower
but I don't recommend there very very
few patients who need to do this every
day you get too much information you get
too worried about it it's not adding
value but it is something to do
occasionally and keep track of it and
again share that information with your
clinician the whole measurements as I
mentioned or lower than office
measurements and sometimes people talk
about having different normals but the
relationship is not uniformly
predictable so I can say if your blood
pressure is 145 in the office it's 135
at home it could be but it might not be
so it's not a fixed relationship on
average it's lower but in any individual
patient or any individual measurement
the correlation is a little bit better
than a coin flip but not a ton better
it's about 60 or 70 70 percent
correlation and as I mentioned when you
isolate home management is the only
intervention the the evidence has shown
little impact all right the final part
of this section is to talk about
ambulatory blood pressure monitoring and
again this is a machine you would
normally pick it up from the cardiology
suite or where you might get an
electrocardiogram or maybe an
echocardiogram or certainly a holter
monitor that's where these live they're
relatively inexpensive
Medicare will cover these especially if
the right diagnosis is put down the
right diagnosis being elevated blood
pressure because you're using it to help
decide whether someone has hypertension
which is the disease versus not
hypertension so Medicare will pay a fuse
elevated blood pressure and again I
already described how it works you can
program it to do anything you want
typically it's several times an hour
while you're awake and usually a few
times at night most people can sleep
through this again it's lower than the
office but the relationship is unsettled
but as I mentioned the recent studies
including a very thorough review by the
US Preventive Services Task Force has
suggested that it measure it predicts
amongst a population of people who's
gonna get into trouble with
cardiovascular disease than the other
tools that is to say it's makes blood
pressure measurement the most predictive
risk factor for heart disease and stroke
compared to office measurement or home
measurement so when we it's available
it's safe it's not that expensive but we
use it quite infrequently in modern
American medicine and and I think one of
the things I favor is using it a bit
more because miss diagnosing someone
with high blood pressure usually means a
lifetime of medications because it's
rare once people get diagnosed with high
blood pressure that they get undiagnosed
with high blood pressure that requires a
little bit of courage on the patient's
part and the clinicians part it also is
the best way to detect something that's
been called white coat hypertension and
this is that syndrome where your blood
pressure is high in the office and low
everywhere else that does exist it's
more common in women than men it's more
common and young than old
is more common in Caucasians than
african-americans so it does exist it's
most common in young Caucasian women and
when you see an elevated blood pressure
in the office as a young woman which is
very important to diagnose correctly
because of the impact it can have on
pregnancy but it can also be over
diagnosed and that's the setting or
careful home measurements or an
ambulatory monitor can be particularly
important you can also use it to monitor
treatment and for some other purposes so
in summary this simple task that we do
from from you know the pharmacy to the
hair salon to your home to my office to
the cardiologists office is turns out to
be a little bit more complicated than we
thought and from a clinician point of
view it's we talk about really
rethinking the office workflow I think
who's ever taking the blood pressure
it's good to repeat the measurement we
the whoever you're working with should
think about whether to take averages or
record the lowest value home
measurements are good we probably do it
more than we need to but less accurately
than we need to so if you're gonna do it
do it well but maybe a little less often
and make sure you'd following best
practices particularly things like cuff
size breasts and so forth and again
similarly the ambulatory monitor should
be used more probably doesn't need to be
used in every patient or even every
patient with new onset high blood
pressure but we certainly whenever we
have a sort of a tiebreaker and patient
doesn't want to be on meds for example
and the clinicians thinking I mean you
should be on meds perfect situation to
get another data point and get the
average under the curve and the area
under the curve and use the ambulatory
monitor all right so I'm gonna move on
that's what I have to say about
measurement I think that's at the
longest section of the talk and but I
think probably the most impactful of the
way it would if done correctly change
how we as clinicians practice and how
you manage your own blood pressure at
home I want to speak briefly about
treating high blood pressure without
medications this is something I've been
interest
since early in my career as many of you
know I studied nutrition before I came
to medical school and I've looked for
the interface between nutrition and
internal medicine and chronic illness
for my entire career and one of the
first studies I ever participated in was
the study that compared what we called
non pharmacologic or non drug therapy
for high blood pressure with drugs that
study it was a great study we had 300
patients that we recruited when we
managed them very carefully my job was
to teach them how to manage it without
drugs and at the end of two a year of
follow-up the drugs won hands down and
in fact the NIH had funded that study
and they had funded about a dozen others
at the same time and every single study
showed the same thing the drugs
outperformed non drug treatment
uniformly across the board so
medications are very effective for
lowering blood pressure we'll say more
about that in a minute and non
pharmacological therapy is a relatively
modest tool in your toolbox across all
patients but for an individual patients
it can be the answer and so in the study
we were looking at the average blood
pressure between 300 patients or 150 on
the non drug and 150 on the drug but for
an individual patient the things I'm
about to talk about can be extremely
effective and can either slow the need
to take medications or allow you to take
one less medication or in some cases
completely treat the blood pressure
without medication so it's a very potent
tool in the toolbox for a motivated
patient especially one who has certain
clinical characteristics now one of the
most important or predictive
characteristics is if you're overweight
or obese and so if if your weight is
high and you have high blood pressure
and there's a close correlation of those
two things then weight loss is uniformly
effective at lowering high blood
pressure so if a patient
20 pounds and keep it off for a year or
so the blood pressure will go down a ton
and it's worth at least one or two
different pills or classes of
medications the problem is that it's
really hard to lose 20 pounds and keep
it off
but for the patient who's at that point
where it's ready you're ready to do that
then weight loss always works at
lowering blood pressure and it's quite
well sustained now eventually as you
gain weight or even if you kept the
weight off as you age you're at risk of
the blood pressure drifting upward again
over time but you can delay medication
for quite some time if you're effective
at treating high blood pressure with
weight loss and those that are
overweight alcohol can also raise blood
pressure you don't have to become a
teetotaler if this is the case but if
your blood pressure is high and your
moderate to heavy alcohol user 3 4 or 5
drinks a day kind of class is the way
some of these studies were done and can
get down to one drink a day the blood
pressure can come down quite nicely
although the amount you'll see is
smaller than with weight loss but it's
it's a real effect but there aren't that
many patients who drink that much and
are willing to stop drinking just for a
little bit of blood pressure control
they'd rather take a medication I think
in many cases salt intake is something
I'll say more about but we've recommend
its salt restriction or sodium
restriction for decades for high blood
pressure it's part of our public health
recommendations for a healthy diet and
the numbers are complicated and I won't
review them particularly but in general
restricting sodium can lower blood
pressure very effectively but only in
some patients and it's probably
somewhere about a third to a half and so
it's a very effective tool for treatment
of high blood pressure in some patients
but it's more controversial about
whether the whole society need
to lower our salt intake in other words
because a lot of patients with high
blood pressure won't benefit from sodium
restriction but if you have high blood
pressure and if you're on a high sodium
intake and if you're african-american in
particular or older in particular both
of which are associated with reduced
clearance of sodium by the kidney so
reduce handling of a salt load if you
will then sodium restriction can be
quite important some of the
recommendations in the past have
recommended extreme sodium restriction
that doesn't work and may be dangerous
and again moderate sodium intake for
most people is fine but it's a tool in
your toolbox if you want to give it a
try especially if you're not overweight
and if you don't drink that much then
it's third on the list and it's worth a
try and I'll come back to that in a
minute there's something called the -
diet which has been around for about
15-20 years which is basically just a
heart-healthy diet so all the the
principles of eating a healthy diet with
mostly plants not too much real food and
with relying on mostly fruits and
vegetables whole grains a small amounts
of meat fish and fowl it's nuts and oils
and so on a Mediterranean type diet or a
heart-healthy diet that's been shown to
lower blood pressure and in fact it's
additive with sodium restriction so if
you combine a heart-healthy diet and
sodium restriction the blood pressure
goes down further physical activity can
lower the blood pressure we recommend
physical activity for everyone
anyway as I like to say physical
activity is biblical
that means you should do it six days a
week and one day of rest the
recommendations are 30 plus minutes a
day and that if your start sedentary and
you get to that point can lower the
blood pressure by 5 to 10 millimeters of
mercury and as I implied earlier a
habitual caffeine consumption okay
consumption is not associated with the
risk of high blood pressure
in fact coffee consumption seems to be
the Teflon substance that is it's not
been shown to be bad for almost anything
but certainly the studies that have
looked at mortality heart disease risk
cancer risk stroke risk risk and the
like I have shown caffeine to be not
associated with bad outcomes in general
now clearly it can make you irritable it
can give you GI problems and cause
atrial fibrillation and some people but
in general when you look at populations
caffeine as a fatigue mitigator as we
call it what the residents is is safe
and effective once upon a time when I
was the nutrition graduate student I
used to say and I had a slide that said
this it was awhile ago that a third of
the salt and the human diet comes
naturally occurring in food a third
comes from food processing and a third
comes from us as consumers at the stove
or at the table and that now is just
totally wrong we've evolved over those
40 years to the point where our diets
are different and our sodium sources
have changed to the point now where
process and wrists are on foods account
for almost 80% of our salt intake so
still a small amount from naturally
occurring in foods and still some at
home but if someone tells you or someone
suggests you or for your own reading
suggests that you want to be in a lower
sodium intake worrying too much about
what you do at the stove or the table is
most likely the wrong tactic and what
you need to do is not purchase anything
in a bag or a box or a can unless it
says in really big letters low salt
because anything in a bag or a box or a
can is high salt unless it says
otherwise and so the whole story of when
you go to a big market only shopping on
the outer
I love the market where the produce is
in the dairy and so forth
makes very good sense so don't limit
your consumption of things in general
better in a bag or a box or a can if
you're concerned about your salt or for
that matter current dietary
recommendations secondly is restaurant
food and other packaged and prepared
foods so so a lot of the services that
are out there delivering food but
particularly restaurant food I don't
know if any of you have gotten into the
into the game
of weighing yourself every day and the
night after you went to your favorite
whatever restaurant that's particularly
high in soy sauce or or whatever and
your blood your weight goes up 4 pounds
and you say this is not possible you
know I didn't eat anything yesterday but
then you realize you went and had sushi
or your favorite Thai food restaurant
and it was all because of the sodium
intake so with those changes in weight
are all salt and water so a couple of
days later it'll come off but that's
that that's showing you how much sodium
is in that food that you ate at the
restaurant and and the worse culprit of
course is fast food so not to pick on
Asian cuisine but fast food is by far
and away the most the biggest culprit
here and of course in our society that's
a concern so sodium restriction knows if
you're eating a mostly plant diet and
you know you're eating your nice
Tomatoes and you want to put some salt
on it and that makes you more Tomatoes
that's a good thing to do or if it helps
you consume your lettuce and you're a
big salad do it because that's healthy
but going to a fast food restaurant or
buying food that's in a bag or box or
can is not alright I'm going to move
next to some of the clinical questions
that are most on the mind of clinicians
working with patients with high blood
pressure in terms of medication
management labeling and so forth and
most of what we know about high blood
pressure over the course of the last
decades
most of all of my career have been from
an entity called the joint national
Commission and this is a NIH brought
together panel of experts they meet
every five to seven years or so and they
come up with different recommendations
and over the years they've defined
what's a normal blood pressure they've
recommended certain types of drugs over
other drugs and so on and the most
recent one was a few years ago it was
the eighth version of this and they
asked three questions and this was good
because they were three really good
questions the three questions that we
all care about which is does treatment
of a blood pressure at a certain level
of elevation work if so how low should I
treat it good questions and third what
medications should I use does it matter
and what they did was which was
different than the seven previous joint
national Commission's is they only
looked at what we call randomized
clinical trials which is the highest
level of medical scientific evidence
where there's a control group blinded
evaluation of large populations of
patients and there had been several
dozen of these that met the criteria for
various questions related to high blood
pressure and they came out with nine
recommendations I'm not going to read
them all I'll summarize the the one that
was most surprising I wouldn't call it
controversial at first but it was it was
definitely a surprise was the
recommendation that for people over 60
years old
which is a lot of the population it was
it has high blood pressure in the United
States that we could use 150 as our cut
point rather than 140 so this was really
great news for primary care and really
great news for patients because if it
meant we can let people ride a little
higher then that means one less
medication typically less side effects
less cost and so on so this was a very
good recommend a very
popular recommendation amongst the
primary care community but others didn't
react so favorably as they'll show you
and they recommended lowering it below
150 and also lowering the second number
the lower number the diastolic blood
pressure to less than 90 so this was a
surprise but favorable and it wasn't
pulled out of the sky and I'm not going
to review this but each of these
abbreviations there's four it stands for
a really big well done publicly funded
randomized clinical trial of the
treatment of high blood pressure and so
they looked at a very large body of
evidence in order to make this
conclusion so it was very what we would
call evidence-based as the other
recommendations were not as
controversial they said for everyone
else under sixty then you should use 140
as your cut point or if treating both
the high number or the low number using
90 as the low number I should just point
out that the it turns out that the high
number is more important than the low
number when I was in medical school that
was in the case we mostly focus on the
lower number what we call diastolic
hypertension but it turns out that
systolic hypertension is the most
predictive of cardiovascular disease
heart disease and stroke at the time
this was being done these studies were
being analyzed the diabetes community
was trying to suggest that lower values
would be better but they reviewed the
evidence carefully and said you know
even in diabetics it doesn't really
matter people with kidney disease CKD
stands for chronic kidney disorder
chronic kidney disease didn't matter you
could use 140 and people were pushing
that in the african-american community
where there was a lot of risk associated
with hypertension that lower numbers
might be better they looked at that
literature and said it doesn't matter
and so basically they concluded that 140
over 90 was fine for everyone that there
were many patients
one-sixty that you could let ride a
little bit and drift up to 150 although
they also said if the patient was under
140 and well-controlled that was fine
too so you were given some flexibility
for people over one over age 60 the
medications they recommended were for
and previous recommendations have
favored one class over another they were
a little bit more agnostic gave us a
smorgasbord of four medications except
it was really four ways to get to three
because two of them shouldn't be used
together so the four categories or
thighs eyes which were water pills weak
water pills but which have a independent
blood pressure lowering effect CC B
stands for calcium channel blockers I'll
give you the specific names of some of
these in a minute those work ACE and hip
a sigh stands for ACE inhibitor and
their I'll give you the names and the
fourth category are angiotensin receptor
blockers or AR B's and they also can be
used as the first class of drugs the the
that the what the one a corollary here
was not to use ace and ARB together so
you could use ace or ARB either first
second or third and then thiazide first
second or third when calcium channel
blockers for a second or third so that
was sort of the modern menu and that was
again good for patients because there
are a lot of medicines in these classes
good for physicians because there are
medicines we knew how to use they you'll
note or you may note that one class of
medicine that's not on this list or beta
blockers and beta blockers have been
used for high blood pressure for many
many years they're very good for other
conditions but when studied compared to
these four drugs they're not as
effective as a single therapy but that's
a little misleading because they're
excellent as the third or fourth drug or
they're excellent if you need it for
something else so it's still lowers your
blood pressure just not quite as
evidence-based in terms of preventing
strokes in particular as these other
four classes of medicines but it's still
on the list we use it all the time it's
very effective way to lower blood
pressure but just not as the first or
second drug as the main blood pressure
lowering treatment in something that not
everyone knew although it was it's been
in the literature for several decades is
that ACE inhibitors and angiotensin
receptor blockers do not work as well in
african-americans as the other classes
of drugs so they specifically went out
of their way and said for
african-americans we recommend thighs
ides or calcium channel blockers first
again that's also a little misleading
because many patients need most patients
need more than one medication and again
once you've gotten to drug number three
you begin to go back to a cenar very
quickly in african-americans but you
would start with thiazide diuretics or a
calcium channel blocker as your drugs a
first choice and in kidney disease
that's the one disease with specific
recommendations especially if you're
spilling a protein in the urine then ACE
inhibitors and ARBs have a long history
of helping preserve kidney function but
that's really more in the context of
having chronic kidney disease than just
bland essential hypertension so those
were the recommendations and we read
this and said alright that's sensible
they asked the right questions
they looked at the right body of
evidence
these are patient centered good for
primary care everything was good and
then the sky fell but these are the
medicines that just to show you some of
the names these are not the brand names
these are the generic names or the
chemical names but you may still
recognize them because many of these
medications have been around for decades
they're all generic they're inexpensive
they're on everyone's formulary and not
necessarily all of them in each category
but one from each category
is on everyone's formulary and so it's
pretty easy to find an ACE inhibitor
that works in a lupillo lisinopril are
pretty common angiotensin receptor
blockers losartan it's probably the most
common BellSouth and is the one that had
a little bit of imperfections in the
synthesis so that's been out of
circulation of late but there are others
in that class the calcium channel
blockers are amlodipine is a common one
for high blood pressure diltiazem and
they is another one and then the thigh
as I type diuretics in the United States
by far and away the most common is
hydrochlorothiazide although some of the
others also work so again lots of
choices they're cheap they're easily
available doctors and nurses know how to
use them because they've been around
forever and so it's a good list and then
there is I I'm not going to show you but
there's of course 15 other categories of
medicines that high blood pressure
experts and others can use if you need
more than three three classes of
medicine although most patients do not
so then what happened as soon after the
guidelines came out a big study was
published and I've already made
reference to this the Sprint study this
was the one with the with the robot in
the dark room measuring blood pressure
it was a really well done study it was
at almost 10,000 men and women they were
over age 50 they had a pre-designated
group that were over age 75
so that was well done to get into the
study you needed a blood pressure over
130 which was fine and you needed to
have a high cardiovascular risk and I'll
explain that more in a moment but it's
an important part of this conversation
interestingly they did not accept people
with diabetes into the Sprint study and
that was a little bit puzzling unless
you knew that in the year or two before
the Sprint study was being planned there
had been another big study funded by the
National Institutes of Health who are
very well done randomized trial that
compared 140 versus one
20 the two blood pressures in patients
with diabetes to see which was better
and there was no difference and so the
conclusion was that 1:40 was as good as
120 and of course that made it much
easier to treat patients because again
it was one or two less medications each
medicine lowers your blood pressure
about 10 points or so on average so so
20 points is a couple of meds so that
was sort of weird because we already
knew that in diabetes it didn't make any
difference but they were doing the study
again but had to exclude patients with
diabetes so it was a little bit funny
the way that played out but it does mean
that the results of this study do not
apply to patients with diabetes who of
course are one of the groups of patients
for whom treatment of high blood
pressure is most important because
they're at high risk of strokes heart
attacks kidney disease and so on they
compared people to get they randomized
people to 120 or 140 similar to the
diabetes study it took an extra medicine
to get people into under 120 and it
turned out it was hard to get people
under 120 the average was actually 121
which means on average about half the
patients warrant couldn't get below 120
even though they were getting free
medicine being seen by their clinician
regularly more frequent than you would
see someone in normal clinical practice
and so on so that was interesting also
that people couldn't actually get less
than 120 especially this cohort of
somewhat older patients and this is the
diabetes study I won't go over it in
detail but it again showed that there
was no difference between 120 and 4140
before the Sprint study now the Sprint
threw us a curveball because the results
were positive that is to say they had
when they looked at all the events
associated with high blood pressure that
a stroke heart attack done fight
non-fatal stroke and heart attack death
from stroke and heart attack it turned
out that there were less events in the
group that was
to 120 so this was a positive study
suggesting that 120 was better than 140
but this was a little counterintuitive
because we already had six or seven
studies that I showed you ten slides ago
that said it didn't really matter we had
this big diabetes study that said it
didn't matter but here was this new
study that said it matters and and then
the hooker was that had also led to less
mortality that people died less often at
120 than 140 so this created two
different conversations so there's a
group of people who thought that sprint
was the end all and that affected the
way you look at this other people who
looked at this you know this is an
unexpected result we're not sure what it
all means and the conversation continued
and got louder there were a lot of side
effects on the Sprint study these were
predate carefully in advance there was
67% more risk and these were serious
side effects the criteria for this was
side effects that the clinician thought
was serious enough to send the patient
to the emergency department or might be
life-threatening
that was the way the criteria was
defined so these are real low blood
pressures 67% more syncope that is
passing out losing consciousness the
third more blood chemistry abnormalities
the third more and kidney problems
two-thirds more so there were a lot of
side effects but nonetheless you know
the overall effect was beneficial and
it's a little hard to explain the
concept here but there's something in
medicine we think about a lot which is
called the number needed to treat and
I'll show you this graphically in a
couple of slides but basically it's a
way to put and like it the odds of you
personally benefiting from an
intervention so remember these studies
are in populations of patients but now
you and I are sitting across the table
deciding what to do for you
and so what are the what's the
likelihood that you will benefit given
what we know about these populations
that benefit you're with me on this it's
a it's a confusing subject but it's a
way it's a way to put some numbers on
the concept of better versus worse and
quantitate it so that people can make
individual decisions and and I'll show
you this graphically it'll be clear in a
minute but in general the number needed
to treat was about roughly a hundred
depending on what your measured over
three years so that's about three
hundred over the course of any one year
so it means that if you and I are
sitting across the table from each other
the odds are to 99 to one that you're
not the one that's going to benefit
you're with me on this so the population
benefits but you may not in fact the
odds are you won't and that's just the
way medical science works similarly the
number needed to harm is about the same
so we get some benefit we get some harm
and you'll have to decide for you which
is better now of course in the way this
study was done the benefits are better
than the harms right the benefit
included heart attack strokes and death
and the harms and you know the harms are
things like you know feeling
light-headed and falling down and having
an abnormal blood test so they're not
the same but it is worth noting that the
frequency was similar these are all
comments I've already made and the last
bullet though is that when you look at
how the Sprint study applies to the
community at large to all of you they're
practically they're only about one out
of six of you that would meet the
criteria to have been a client of a
subject in the Sprint study in other
words whether it's age or other diseases
or what your cardiovascular risk was
whether you had
biddies all those things were factors
that determine whether you can enter the
study or not and only one out of six
patients with high blood pressure were
able to enter this study so again the
generalized ability to the community at
large is modest and here are some of the
risk factors so there was no one with
her diabetes no one with stroke no one
was frail and no one was that sure to
say under age 50 and as I mentioned
there was free care frequent visits and
so forth and this very careful
measurement that was lower than the
usual measurement if you remember then
the other thing that was really
important to know is that these were
very high risk patients and that we many
of you have probably gone to websites
and measured your 10-year risk of
cardiovascular disease of having a
stroke or heart attack there's a very
good one on the Mayo Clinic it's called
a Mayo Clinic statin decision site if
you just google Mayo Clinic statin it
comes up and you can put in your various
risk factors and calculate your ten year
risk and we use it in clinical practice
a lot to decide who needs a statin drug
for the for their risk but it's also
relevant in this conversation about high
blood pressure and in fact to enter this
study you needed a ten year risk of
about fifteen of a 15% and in fact most
people had 20% if you've had a heart
attack your risk of having an event in
the next ten years is 20% so 20% is a
high number in this conversation it's
like you've already had a heart attack
and so these are people who are on the
fairly far long spectrum of risk of
cardiovascular disease and here's the
cartoon it doesn't doesn't project super
well but what this is trying to say is
bring to life that concept of number
needed to treat and what I mean by this
is the so each little gray box
represents one person and if we have say
on the left-hand side here a thousand
people
we can show who are then treated for
three years to a blood pressure goal of
120 rather than 140 based on the data
from the Sprint study we know that 22 or
16 of them will not have a heart attack
or stroke in the three year period
that's that's an it's the same as the
number needed to treat I've just done
some arithmetic and and made it a
cartoon but the point of this the way to
think of this again if you think about
odds if you started as one of the grey
people the vast majority of the grey
people stay gray after three and a half
years of being on two and half medicines
right only a very small number become
blue and that's that idea that what
happens in populations is different than
what happens in an individual patient
you're with me so this is very it's a
very intriguing way to think about
medical interventions and you can do
this kind of chart with anything and we
do it with cholesterol we do with a lot
of cardiovascular management but you can
do this with lots of other things so if
you have pneumonia from pneumococcal
pneumonia macaca disease and I give you
penicillin almost every one of you maybe
80% of you will get better right that's
so the number of boxes this would all be
blue if this what we're talking about
pneumonia and penicillin but now we're
talking about treatment of a risk factor
to prevent events over a period of time
and the number of people benefit one by
one is much less and so this is an
important concept and again just to
balance it almost an equal number we're
harmed although to be fair the benefits
are more important than the harms but
the harms are real and again take-home
point here
most people started gray and stay gray
very few people change as a result of
this intervention even though everyone
has to take the medications alright so
let me close this part of the
conversation and we can then take some
questions
the long and the short of it is this
study came out and there has been
started and has continues to this day
a debate in the medical community about
what to do and so the cardiologists took
this study and came out with some
guidelines that said I'll show you them
in a minute we should follow these
guidelines and then the just around the
same time the primary care community the
internal medicine community in the
family medicine committee looked at the
guidelines and said you know actually we
like the Joint National Commission
guidelines we like 150 if you're over
age 64 everyone else at 140 but the
cardiologists said something totally
different they said that if it's over
130 you should be treated 140 everyone
should be treated and 130 if you're at
high risk and that anyone over 120 we
would call an elevated blood pressure so
it totally changes the conversation from
140 to 120 based on the results of this
one big study and so these are what
their recommendations are for treatment
basically saying if you've already had a
heart attack then we should treat you
using 130 as the cut point if you're at
very high risk of having a heart attack
we should treat you at 130 and if you're
at lower risk less than 10% then 140 is
okay and so though that's now the debate
we have the 130 and 140 school and we
have the 140 and 150 school and we're
all just caught in the middle and we
have two groups of really smart people
looking at the same studies and drawing
completely different conclusions now to
try to sort this out there been a couple
of studies of late there was one just
published this week I don't have a slide
from but it's it's consistent sort of
with what I'm going to show you but this
was a very nice study that was published
this year that looked at all of the
studies of high blood pressure was 70
different studies of 300,000 patients
included men and women 60 years
old and basically they tried to answer
the question of does it matter what the
blood pressure is when you start when
you start treatment and basically they
looked at all the studies and they said
and this this star here the asterisk
means that the results are significant
and what they showed is that if your
blood pressure is over 160 and you treat
it treatment works there's a 7 to 7
percent reduction in mortality and a 22
percent reduction in cardiovascular
events so everyone agrees with that if
it's over 160 it should be lowered 140
to 160 this study showed it works so if
it's over 140 it works I will note there
was a paper published this week that
just showed even between 140 and 160
it's not so clear that it works if it's
less than 140 it doesn't work so even
though blood pressure becomes a risk
factor at low levels if you're less than
140 when you treat it you don't get any
benefit from that treatment according to
these 70 studies so over 160 it works
over 140 it works although now we have a
little debate there but under 140 it
doesn't work with the one possible
exception and people who have heart
disease CHD stands for coronary heart
disease so if you already have had a
heart attack then it's reasonable to
treat at 130
which is what the cardiology guidelines
say and then what happened after this
conversation is that the family
physicians independently and the
internist again looked at their data and
all the recommendations they said well
what do we think are we gonna go along
with the cardiology guidelines and they
both said no so we're gonna stick to the
guidelines we published a couple of
years ago and still stick with 150 if
you're over age 60 or 144 most patients
it's also worth noting that if you use
120 if use the guidelines that
the cardiology guidelines suggests that
half the population is now labeled as
having hypertension and you know that
just doesn't have face validity right it
doesn't make sense that that all of us
would be sick that that half the
population would be hypertensive so my
final thoughts and then we'll open it up
we talked about measuring blood pressure
differently in the office with carefully
following the 19 guidelines I would say
if you're a patient in an office like
that you should ask the clinician to
retake your blood pressure if the first
measurement is high sometimes it's not
feasible to do that out where the
medical assistant took the blood
pressure but maybe when you get in to
see your your personal physic Lynn ition
that would be a time to have the blood
pressure taken again in that close to
correct method as possible I think it's
it's excellent to do home monitoring get
a good good machine something that fits
over the arm don't play with the wrists
fingers and so on make sure it covers
your arm the way it's the dimensions are
supposed to many of you will need a
large size cuff which takes an extra
conversation with who's ever selling you
the Machine and then sit comfortably
take have your arm be unclothed and so
on as we discussed before you take it
take it before breakfast before your
medications and take it before dinner
consider ambulatory monitoring for those
who are in a toss-up zone you're just
not sure what to do especially after
this talk and so an ambulatory monitor
is a excellent tiebreaker and gives you
another complete relatively inexpensive
totally safe and if a non-invasive way
to collect information and look at your
cardiovascular risk so you would be
doing this anyway if you're interested
in preventing heart disease or stroke
with the use of aspirin or statins
because we make those decisions based on
your risk and what this literature now
suggests is that we should be using that
risk prediction to help decide who
should be on blood pressure pills - and
if you're really low risk then the
benefit for you may be a very high
number needed to treat in other words it
may not be worth it to you to take the
medications and again it then it depends
on side-effects and preferences and
costs and so on
I think 140 over 90 s a reasonable
compromise these days I think although
this new paper again questions whether
that's maybe too low but nonetheless I
think most of the literature would
suggest that for most people 140 over 90
is a is a good number at which we begin
treatment but make sure that is a taken
correctly because if it's falsely
elevated then way too many people will
be treated 150 over 90 is probably fine
for a lot of low risk older older over
age 60 people not so old but over age 60
that to be between 140 and 150 is not
the end of things it's fine especially
if you're having side effects don't want
to take a third medicine say or whatever
that may be fine for a lot of people
especially if your overall risk is low
or whatever your personal preferences
are given that gray box diagram that I
show that you may not be the one who
benefits and for those who are very high
risk especially those with bad heart
disease treating less than 130 over 80
may make sense if you're in that
situation you're probably seeing a
cardiologist already anyway and it will
be their preference to treat you to 130
over 80 and that's okay
because that's where the evidence is
strongest and again use shared
decision-making what we mean by this is
that try to understand the
numbers as well as you can health
literacy is complicated and this is what
we call health numeracy which is
understanding the numbers which is even
more complicated but if you're inclined
that way and have a clinician who's
willing to work the numbers or point you
to a good website then it's worth
thinking about it and you given the
number needed to treat and the
uncertainty here I think it's it would
be incorrect for clinicians to be
dogmatic and so I think your preferences
about this rule the day and what we've
learned particularly strongly of late is
that using team approaches are very
effective and some of the big systems
like Kaiser in Northern California and
others have done a terrific job
controlling blood pressure in their
population with some innovative
strategies that really rely on non
physicians particularly helping to
manage blood pressure but it also
includes careful measurements so that
people aren't mislabeled so with that
I'll thank you and stop and leave plenty
of time for questions thank you very
much yes the question is where does
stroke and atrial fibrillation come in
well the easiest thing to say is that in
the causative relationship high blood
pressure is a risk factor for producing
both so we definitely know that people
with hypertension elevated blood
pressure are a greater risk for stroke
and also greater risk for atrial
fibrillation atrial fibrillation the
medicines we use to control atrial
fibrillation double often do double duty
as blood pressure pills so some of the
calcium channel blockers beta blockers
things like that and so it's not in
clinical practice it's usually not that
big a conversation because you already
need those medicines to control your
heart rate since that's one of the ways
they work but for stroke we we do
recommend tighter control but 140 is
probably fine you don't have to go to
one-third
because there is a little bit of risk of
being too low for some of these diseases
as well and so 140 is probably the right
way to go for both atrial fibrillation
and stroke and Moe and very importantly
although this is more your doctor your
clinicians issue is when you're in the
hospital with a stroke we let the blood
pressure ride very high and we've
learned that treating it too soon can be
quite dangerous so that's a little
counterintuitive but if you wander the
halls of the neuro intensive care unit
here you'll see people with blood
pressures routinely over 180 and 190 and
so forth that's just when they're in the
hospital during the huge stroke as they
come out over the course of four to six
weeks or whatever then we begin to begin
to treat it with a goal of getting less
than 140 for sure if they have
concurrent heart disease then we go to
130 so the question was in the the
number needed the grid with the number
needed to treat the harms were low blood
pressure syncope
blood blood tests abnormalities and
kidney abnormalities so they were all
pre-designed side effects that were
thought serious enough to send other
patients to the hospital to be evaluated
but so they're serious but they're not
like having a heart attack or a stroke
or dying you know so that's when I say
they're serious but not as serious as
the benefits yes there are medicines
that can cause high blood pressure the
most important or illegal ones yeah so
methamphetamine and cocaine are two on
the short list some of the other
derivatives in that category such as
pseudoephedrine that people take
sometimes for respiratory congestion
phentermine which is a weight loss drug
that I don't recommend can raise your
blood pressure and they're a handful of
others well that depends so the comment
was about prostate medicine
the most common prostate medicine
actually lowers your blood pressure it's
mdecins a class of medicines in fact
that we used to use to treat low blood
treat high blood pressure so that would
be an unusual circumstance but yeah
let's see it's very low blood pressure a
risk factor yeah
that's controversial the if you were if
if we if if you were gonna draw the
relationship between ill health and
blood pressure on a curve the shape of
the curve is so ill health would be on
the y axis your blood pressures on the x
axis the shape of the curve in many
studies is a j that is to say that the
lowest blood pressures are associated
with poor outcomes now that's a little
bit confusing because some of the people
in those kind of studies are sick and so
if you're frail and at the end of life
and your blood pressure is coming down
that may account for some of that J but
the current concern is that it also may
increase the risk of heart attacks that
you need a certain a certain blood
pressure to fill the the vessels that
supply the heart when the heart is
relaxing so called diastole and so there
is a concern about that it's not proven
the studies have yo-yoed a little bit
over the course of the last several
decades but it is a concern that over
treatment or at least in de novo before
without treatment people with lower
blood pressures may well be at increased
risk and in the treatment studies if you
treat too low there may be an increased
risk of heart attack in at-risk patients
and so that is one of the concerns and
that's why you saw that people were
passing out with the aggressive
treatment they weren't having more heart
attacks though in that that study so the
literature is mostly reassuring but
there has been a concern circulating in
the scientific community that may be too
low
can increase the risk of heart attacks
but in in in many heart conditions like
heart failure we treat people very low
and that's for a different reason that's
to allow the heart to function to pump
better so that's a different
conversation so there are different
circumstances where we would
strategically aim for low but for
specifically a coronary artery disease
there's this concern but again the
Sprint study was reassuring in that
regard there was no increased risk of
heart attack in the low group in fact
they had less heart attacks so the
current thinking is is probably okay
then and especially if it's your second
number that's really low
so sometimes especially as people get
older the blood the blood vessels get
stiff and so the upper number may be
high and you have systolic high blood
pressure but the lower number is really
low like 60 or 40 or maybe it just keeps
you never goes you know you can't record
any number and that's okay
as far as we think that that's okay that
that's not associated with increased
risk but it has been in the literature
as a concern but the current thinking is
is probably not a problem
so the question is is there any evidence
about which class of drugs is better for
any specific patient and if you go back
in the the the history of the joint
national commission recommendations over
the years there's been a wide variety
you know there was several iterations
where thighs eyes were best for everyone
so I used to tell the residents everyone
should be started on a thiazide and then
the literature changed a little bit and
it became thighs eyes or beta blockers
so then I would say to the residents
well thighs eyes should be first or
second you know you could start with
beta blocker you start with that side
now we have three other drugs so now we
say guys eyes need to be in the top
three so the recommendations have
changed as you'll notice beta blockers
are off the list because we think they
don't work as well to prevent stroke the
prostate medicines are off the list
because they're inferior to other
classes of blood pressure pills
and in african-americans as my neural
therapy
the ACE inhibitors and ARBs don't work
as well but the other studies there
there is a literature out there of mono
therapy you know which drug is better to
start but that's that's sort of a silly
question because most people end up as
they age anyway and needing more than
one drug and so it doesn't really matter
what you start with because everything
works and it's really more about
side-effect profile costs formulary
preferences and so on
so if thiazide makes you urinate and
that's a problem for you then that's not
a good drug for you and it doesn't
matter whether it's two millimeters
better than the other one or not or face
inhibitors cause your potassium to go
too high then that become a more
dominant question than whether it's two
millimeters better or fours but in
general the main thinking is that in
african-americans there is a class
preference based on race but if for
everyone else it's thought to be neutral
and that's why you get this mortgage
board of four classes so there are there
is a literature on that but it's
probably not worth concerning about it
and the guidelines that have ignored
that literature basically just countered
it so the question is if home if home
measurement is is low then and your
office measurement is high is it a
measurement error or is it white coat
hypertension and the answer is we don't
know and so what you want to do is
either thoughtfully look at the cuff you
purchased or what I would recommend to a
patient is to bring the cuff in and
we'll do it together and see what the
story is but sometimes the cuffs are
just too small these single manometers
in the office are maintained carefully
the digital measurements that many the
the offices use are as good as the
mercury sphingo manometer if they're
maintained correctly and the home
measurement tools can be as well
especially if it's a standard sphingo
manometer but you know things need to be
maintained so a cuff that ages may lose
its accuracy and
Consumer Reports does review these and I
won't favor anyone machine over another
but they do and and so they're a good
organization I'd follow their
recommendations but I think the most
valuable thing is to bring the cuff into
the physician's office and just compare
and that way you'll get a chance to see
how you're doing you know if your
measurement technique is good and if the
equipment is good and on that note I'll
stop I'll stay and take some additional
questions up front good evening everyone
[Applause]
[Music]
you